Hi welcome back in this video we're looking at indexes and indexes are really useful because they allow
our table to perform searches a lot faster for example.
So we've got this select staff from public domain users.
Imagine we have millions of users as opposed to only three if I wanted to select a specific user searching
by username.
Note not ID but the name I would have to do something like select staff from public users where name
equals Ralph Smith for example.
And now down here at the bottom right we get the amount of time that it takes to perform this search
which was 18 milliseconds.
That's quite quick.
If we had millions of users to perform this search it would take a long time and here's why.
The name is just kind of a normal column if you wish.
The idea is a primary key and that makes it special but the name is just normal column that has some
data.
And this is kind of like to some extent.
Think of the ID as the word in a dictionary and the name as the definition of the word you would never
search a dictionary by definition.
It just doesn't make sense.
You would always search by the word because the word tends to be alphabetically ordered and therefore
it's easy to search.
This is kind of like telling our table search by definition.
And naturally the only way to do that is to go through every row in the table until you find one that
matches.
Now if we have limit one that is a lot better because as soon as it finds one row with Ralph Smith then
it stops.
But if we don't have a limit one it has to go through absolutely every row of our table.
Now that is not very good it's not very fast.
So what we want to do is allow our table to know that the names are ordered in a way that it can search
Nic.
So what we're going to do is indeed ordered the names kind of alphabetically it's not really like that
but you can think of it like that.
Really what it's going to happen if you know a bit about algorithms and things like that.
What's going to happen is that we're going to order the names in a binary tree.
But if you don't know what that is don't worry about it just know that an index order is the data in
such a way and it allows possible sequel to perform searches a lot faster and more efficiently.
So that's what an index is for.
It's just like the index in a dictionary the huddle the words the index allows us to search faster more
efficiently.
However an index is not free.
Not that you have to pay for it but indexes take disk space but you have to store that binary tree somewhere
.
And overhead it's slow to insert data.
It's not really slow but it's a bit slower to insert data and to update data because then the binary
tree that holds that structure that allows us to search has to be updated as well.
Whenever we perform an insert or an update in our table so do not create indexes for things that you're
not going to search by and if possible don't create indexes at all and just search by ID.
But I appreciate that sometimes that's not possible.
For example if you have a table with weather information each row might have an ID but you would probably
also want to search by location so it would make sense to give the location an index as well.
You may not want to search by temperature so it may not make sense to give the temperature an index
.
That sort of stuff.
Don't be silly with creating indexes and you'll be fine.
The primary key as I mentioned is an index by default and is in fact a unique index which is a special
type of index when I look at that.
OK so let's create an index for our username so that we can search by user name.
Fast.
What are we going to do is create index.
Then we're going to give the index a name and once again this has to be unique.
But you can call it whatever you want.
For my case I'm going to call it user's name index and then we see on and then we specify the table
then we are creating the index on public users and then the column that was specifying that we're creating
the index funds.
In this case name.
OK so when we do that then that says OK that's fine.
Now if we perform the search again is not really going to be much faster in fact it's 90 milliseconds
more of the same.
And because there so few rows it just doesn't take any time at all.
But trust me it would be faster if we had a lot of data.
I mentioned that the ID is a unique index because each of the items on that binary tree are unique because
the IDs are unique row and you can call them if you have your data that is unique.
I'm just saying this for your knowledge and username is not unique.
But if we had another piece of data that is unique we could create a unique index in just the same way
create a unique index index name on a table column and that's how you create a unique index just in
case you need that at some point later on when you're when you're programming.
So that's how you do that.
OK.
You can also create multi-column indices or indexes.
I never know which ones right.
OK.
Forgot about that.
You can you can get multi-column indexes them which are useful only in one scenario.
So don't create multi-column indexes an arbitrarily select start from
public movies where ID equals one and user ID equals two.
For example say you were always performing your search on an ID and user ID for your movies.
You were never performing searches on user ID alone.
And you usually don't perform searches on ID alone.
So you always do your searches on both of these columns simultaneously.
It's more efficient to create a multi-column index if you are doing and filtering.
So select staff from public don't movies.
Right.
That's not what I meant to do.
So when you're doing that you want to create a multi-column index which is to create index and then
use give it an index name on the movies table.
And here you can specify multi column and the column is to specify your index which are the ID and the
user ID.
So that's how you specify multi-column index.
And once again this is only useful if you are doing and filtering on your data.
If you are filtering data by user id only work by an ID only do not have a multi-column index doesn't
make sense just have an index on ID and add seperate index on the user id and that's fine as an extra
bit of information.
If you have an index on ID and a separate index on user id Pontmercy equal is not stupid.
And it does increase performance substantially when you do wear ID and user ID if you have separate
indices for these two.
This is still faster than if you had that no indices.
It's a bit slower than if you had a multi-column index but you know in some scenarios it may be better
to create separate and Azeez than to create a multi-column index and have all of this is way over your
head and you're like I knew it was going on.
Don't worry about it.
Don't create multi-column indexes and you'll be fine.
OK.
Last bit of information.
And remember I'm seeing these things because in the future you're going to be learning more and more
about Patras equally going to be using it in your apps and you're going to be like I wish I could create
an index that is more performing when I'm doing a search and if I didn't tell you about multi-column
indexes you may never realize that you can create multiple indices.
So there's just for you to keep in the macro you had in mind for the future maybe you will find a use
case for it.
The last bit of info in this can become corrupted in some scenarios which is unfortunate and but when
they do become corrupted then your next search won't work and all your searches will be a lot slower
and you can fix that by doing re-index and then you can re-index a specific mix and then give it the
index name such as user's ID index where users name index.
So you can re-index specific index and that will delete the index and rebuild it.
And this takes a bit of time but it will fix any index problems that you've got.
And also in some scenarios if you're performing a lot of updates and in search the index can become
really big and occupy a lot of disk space.
And so it helps to do this.
If you are doing a lot of updates it just reduces the size of your index.
You can also re index a table which does the re-index index for all of the indices in your table.
You can re-index a database which does the same thing for all the indices in your database.
This is especially useful re-index database when your indices that the database depends on become corrupted
.
So the database depends on a number of indices which are called System indices and if they become corrupted
your database will just not start up and then you've got a big problem.
So what you can do is tell postscripts to not use any indices and then your data will start up and then
you can re-index your database and then that will take a while and then you can restart pushcarts telling
it to use indices.
We're not going to look at how you can start and stop progress with or without indices because that's
just a bit more advanced.
But the Pasqua sequel documentation is very helpful in these cases.
And once again I'm just telling you all this stuff.
So in the future when you encounter a problem you know that you can fix it.
But that's it.
Regarding indices I know there's a lot to take and if you're not really interested by all the complicated
indexing and stuff then just kind of forget about it just know that it exists and that's it.
Without said that's how you create indices and that's how you re-index them.
And that's how you create multi-column indexes which are also useful if you are performing and filtering
on your table.
OK.
Thanks for watching and listening to me babble on about indices and I'll see you in the next video.